Adds ExDoc cheatsheet blog post (#1665)
elixir-lang/elixir-lang.github.com: _posts/2022-12-20-exdoc-cheatsheet-continuously-improving-documentation.markdown

---
layout: post

> title: "ExDoc Cheatsheet, continuously improving documentation experience"

Reviewer: What do you think about "Cheatsheets and 10 other features in ExDoc that improve the developer experience" as title? We would need to rename the file. Let's also change the date to tomorrow (which is when I should publish it). :)

Author: Done. 👍

author: Hugo Baraúna
category: Internals
excerpt: This post explains the motivation behind the new ExDoc Cheatsheet feature. It also highlights other ExDoc features that show how it has been evolving to make the documentation experience in Elixir better and better.
---

ExDoc has a cool new feature, [Cheatsheets](https://hexdocs.pm/ex_doc/cheatsheet.html)!

In this blog post, we'll explain what that new feature is and the motivation behind it. We'll also take the opportunity to highlight other ExDoc features that show how it has been evolving to make the documentation experience in Elixir better and better.

## What is ExDoc Cheatsheet and how it improves documentation experience

> ExDoc's Cheatsheets are Markdown files with the  `.cheatmd` extension. One can use it to write cheatsheets about their Elixir project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ExDoc's Cheatsheets are Markdown files with the  `.cheatmd` extension. One can use it to write cheatsheets for their Elixir projects.
```

Reviewer: We should also link to the Ecto cheatsheets as an example here.

> Writing and reading cheatsheets is not exactly a new thing for developers. But, what that feature brings as a novelty is a possibility of integrating a cheatsheet alongside the rest of the documentation of an Elixir project instead of hosting it in a different place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Writing and reading cheatsheets is not exactly new to developers. What ExDoc brings to the table is the possibility of integrating cheatsheets alongside the rest of the documentation of an Elixir project, instead of hosting it in a different place.
```

Developers need different kinds of docs at different times. When one is learning about a new library, a guide format is proper. When one needs to know if a library can solve a specific problem, an API reference can be more appropriate. When someone wants to remember a couple of functions they already used from that library, a cheatsheet could be more practical.

Imagine if you had to go to a different place for every type of documentation you're looking for. That would make a very fragmented experience. And not only for readers of documentation but also for writers.

ExDoc Cheatsheet represents one step further in the direction of making documentation in Elixir an even more comprehensive and integrated experience.

> It's also worth mentioning that ExDoc Cheatshees is inspired by [devhints.io](https://devhints.io) from [Rico Sta. Cruz](https://twitter.com/rstacruz), and it was a contribution from [Paulo Valim](https://twitter.com/paulovalim) and [Yordis Prieto](https://twitter.com/alchemist_ubi).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ExDoc Cheatshees are inspired by [devhints.io](https://devhints.io) from [Rico Sta. Cruz](https://twitter.com/rstacruz), and it was a contribution from [Paulo Valim](https://twitter.com/paulovalim) and [Yordis Prieto](https://twitter.com/alchemist_ubi).
```

## 10 features that show how ExDoc has improved developer experience over time
We added Cheatsheets to ExDoc because we value developer experience and believe documentation is a core aspect of it.

> Since the beginning, one of Elixir's principles is that documentation should be a first-class citizen. What this idea means to us is that documentation should be easy to write and easy to read. ExDoc has been continuously evolving over the years, guided by that idea.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the beginning, one of Elixir's principles is that documentation should be a first-class citizen. What this idea means to us is that documentation should be easy to write and easy to read. ExDoc has been continuously evolving over the years, guided by this principle.
```

> We thought the release of Cheatsheets could be an excellent opportunity to remember how ExDoc has evolved.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Here are some of the features added to ExDoc over the years that make reading and writing documentation in Elixir a great experience.

Reviewer: Instead of using "great experience" again, what about "joy" or something similar?

```suggestion
Here are some of the features added to ExDoc over the years that make reading and writing documentation in Elixir a joy.
```

### Beautiful and usable design
As developers, we may not have the skill to make beautifully designed UIs. That doesn't mean we don't appreciate it.

Here's what ExDoc-based documentation looked like almost ten years ago, with its original layout based on [YARD](https://yardoc.org/).

![](https://i.imgur.com/O9xKjR8.jpg)

Here's what it looks like today:

![](https://i.imgur.com/ZKI1T23.png)

The evolution of ExDoc's design helped ExDoc-based documentation be more visually appealing and easier to read and navigate.

### Links to source code

Sometimes you're reading the docs of a library, and you want to know more about the implementation of a function. Or you found something in the documentation that could be improved and wants to help.

In those situations, it's helpful to go from the documentation to the source code. ExDoc makes that dead easy.

For every module, function, or page, ExDoc gives you a link that you can click to go directly to the project's source code inside Github:

![](https://i.imgur.com/PXvoeDk.gif)

### Guides

> One of the most common formats of library documentation is an API reference. But depending on your need, that's not the most approachable doc format. For example, when you're just getting started with a lib, or when you want to learn how to solve a specific problem using it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the most common formats of library documentation is an API reference. But depending on your need, that's not the most approachable doc format. For example, when you're just getting started with a library, or when you want to learn how to solve a specific problem using it.
```

That's why ExDoc allows writing other types of docs besides API references, like Getting Started Guides or How-tos.

> Look at how [Ecto's documentation](https://hexdocs.pm/ecto/Ecto.html) uses that, for example:

Reviewer: I think this is a better link as it includes guides and how-tos:

```suggestion
Look at how [Ecto's documentation](https://hexdocs.pm/ecto/getting-started.html) uses that, for example:
```

Here's an example of how Ecto use grouped functions for its `Repo` module:

![](https://i.imgur.com/ZE7N312.png)

Instead of listing the ~40 functions of `Ecto.Repo` as a single extensive list, it presents them grouped by five cohesive topics:

- Query API
- Schema API
- Transaction API
- Runtime API
- User callbacks

The same functionality is available for modules and pages (guides, how-tos, etc). Phoenix is a [good example](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/overview.html) of how that's used.

### Full-text search

Sometimes you don't know or don't remember the name of the function that you're looking for. For example, let's say you're looking for a function for dealing with file system directories.

Although there's no function or module called "directory" in Elixir, when you type "directory" in [Elixir's documentation](https://hexdocs.pm/elixir/search.html?q=directory), it will return all the entries that have the word "directory" inside the documentation. It will even return entries with variations of the word "directory", like "directories", doing a fuzzy search.

![](https://i.imgur.com/IHHuej8.png)

The search bar also supports autocompletion for module and function names:

> ![](https://i.imgur.com/2cmsuDi.gif)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![](https://i.imgur.com/2cmsuDi.gif)

The best part is that full-text search is fully implemented on the client-side, which means ExDoc pages can be fully hosted as static pages anywhere.
```
